Assembly Bill
              
                        No. 712
                      CHAPTER 283An act to amend Sections 89538 and 89539 of the Education  Code, relating to the California State University.
                  
                  [
                Filed with
              
                Secretary of State
               September 01, 1999.
                      
                Approved  by
              
                Governor
               August 31, 1999.
                      ]
                LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 712, Firebaugh.
                          California State University: disciplinary actions against employees.Existing law establishes the California State University and authorizes the operation of its various campuses under the administration of the Trustees of the California State University.  Existing law sets forth a procedure for employee discipline that contemplates, under specified conditions, the dismissal, demotion, suspension, or reassignment of an employee.  Under that procedure, an employee may answer a notice of reassignment, or may appeal a dismissal, suspension, or demotion, within 20 days.This bill would extend the period allowed for an answer or appeal to 30 days.Digest KeyBill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 89538 of the Education Code is amended to read:89538. (a) Notice of dismissal, demotion, or suspension for cause of an employee shall be in writing, signed by the chancellor or his or her designee and be served on the employee.  The notice shall set forth a statement of causes, the events or transactions upon which the causes are based, the nature of the penalty and the effective date, and a statement of the employee’s right to answer within 30 days and request a hearing before the State Personnel Board.(b) Notice of the reassignment of an administrative employee pursuant to Section 66609 shall be in writing, and shall be served on the employee.  The notice shall set forth a statement of the employee’s right to answer within 30 days and request a hearing before the trustees.  This hearing shall be only on the question of whether the position to which the employee is reassigned is commensurate with his or her qualifications.SEC. 2. Section 89539 of the Education Code is amended to read:89539. (a) (1) Any employee dismissed, suspended, or demoted for cause may request a hearing by the State Personnel Board by filing a request, in writing, with the board within 30 days of being served with the notice.(2) The request may be on any one or more of the following grounds:(A) The required procedure was not followed.(B) There is no ground for dismissal, suspension, or demotion.(C) The penalty is excessive, unreasonable, or discriminatory.(D) The employee did not do the acts or omissions alleged as the events or transactions upon which the causes are based.(E) The acts or omissions alleged as the events or transactions upon which the causes are based were justified.(b) The State Personnel Board shall hold a hearing, following the same procedure as in state civil service proceedings, and shall render a decision affirming, modifying, or revoking the action taken.  In a hearing, the burden of proof shall be on the party taking the dismissal action.(c) An administrative employee reassigned pursuant to Section 66609 may request a hearing by the trustees by filing a request for a hearing, in writing, with the trustees within 30 days of being served with the notice. The request may be on the grounds that the required procedure was not followed or that the position to which the employee is reassigned is not commensurate with his or her qualifications.  The trustees shall hold a hearing, and shall render a decision affirming, modifying, or revoking the action taken.(d) The State Personnel Board may bill the California State University for the costs incurred in conducting hearings involving employees of the California State University pursuant to Sections 89535 to 89542, inclusive.