CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 711Introduced  by 
                Assembly Member
              Dickerson
                (Coauthor(s):
              
                Assembly Member
              Pescetti)February 24, 1999An act to amend Section 13523 of the Penal Code, relating to peace officers, and making an appropriation therefor.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 711, as introduced, Dickerson.
                          Peace Officers’ Training Fund:  reserve peace officers.Existing law creates in the State Treasury a Peace Officers’ Training Fund.  Existing law also requires the Commission on Peace Officer Training to annually allocate and the State Treasurer to periodically pay from the Peace Officers’ Training Fund, at intervals specified by the commission, to each city, county, and district which has applied and qualified for aid pursuant to this chapter an amount determined by the commission pursuant to standards set forth in its regulations.  Existing law further requires that state aid only be provided for training expenses of full-time regularly paid employees, as defined by the commission, of eligible agencies from cities, counties, or districts. This bill additionally would require that state aid also be provided for legislatively mandated Continuing Professional Training (CPT) expenses for level I and II reserve peace officers, as defined by the commission, of eligible agencies from cities, counties, or districts.By increasing the allocations paid from the Peace Officers’ Training Fund, a continuously appropriated fund, and by adding categories of peace officers for which the money in the fund may be expended, this bill would make an appropriation.Digest Key
      Vote:
      2/3  
      Appropriation:
      YES  
      Fiscal Committee:
      YES  
      Local Program:
      NO  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 13523 of the Penal Code is amended to read:13523. The commission shall annually allocate and the State Treasurer shall periodically pay from the Peace Officers’ Training Fund, at intervals specified by the commission, to each city, county, and district which has applied and qualified for aid pursuant to this chapter an amount determined by the commission pursuant to standards set forth in its regulations.  The commission shall grant aid only on a basis that is equally proportionate among cities, counties, and districts.  State aid shall only be provided for training expenses of full-time regularly paid employees, as defined by the commission, of eligible agencies from cities, counties, or districts.  State aid shall also be provided for legislatively mandated Continuing Professional Training (CPT) expenses for level I and II reserve peace officers, as defined by the commission, of eligible agencies from cities, counties, or districts.  No other reimbursement for reserve officer training is authorized.In no event shall any allocation be made to any city, county, or district which is not adhering to the standards established by the commission as applicable to such city, county, or district.