Assembly Bill
              
                        No. 713
                      CHAPTER 235An act to add Section 2991 to the Civil Code, relating to motor vehicle lease contracts.
                  
                  [
                Filed with
              
                Secretary of State
               August 26, 1999.
                      
                Approved  by
              
                Governor
               August 25, 1999.
                      ]
                LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 713, Firebaugh.
                          Motor vehicle lease contracts: translation.Existing law requires any person engaged in a trade or business who negotiates primarily in the Spanish language orally, or in writing, in the course of entering into, among other things, a lease contract for a motor vehicle or a loan or extension of credit secured other than by real property, or unsecured, for use primarily for personal, family or household purposes, to deliver to the party of that contract or agreement and prior to the execution thereof, a Spanish language translation of the contract or agreement, as specified.Existing law generally regulates lease contracts for motor vehicles, as specified, and prescribes the contents of those contracts.  Existing law makes the knowing and willful violation of these regulations a misdemeanor.This bill would require, as of  January 1, 2001, any prospective assignee that provides a lessor under a lease contract for a motor vehicle with any preprinted form for use as a lease contract to also provide the lessor, upon the request of the lessor, with a Spanish language translation of the preprinted form.  By creating a new crime, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
   The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.Digest KeyBill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 2991 is added to the Civil Code, to read:2991. Any prospective assignee that provides a lessor under a lease contract with any preprinted form for use as a lease contract shall, upon the request of a lessor, provide the lessor with a Spanish language translation of the preprinted form.SEC. 2. Section 1 of this act shall become operative on  January 1, 2001.SEC. 3. No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution.