Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               April 26, 1999
                Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               May 06, 1999
                Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               June 01, 1999
                    CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 702Introduced  by 
                Assembly Member
              VincentFebruary 24, 1999An act to add Article 5 (commencing with Section 12050) to Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code, relating to employment assistance, making an appropriation therefor.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 702, as amended, Vincent.
                           Work-force investment and economic development.Existing state law does not contain provisions implementing Title I of the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (P.L. 105-220) within the state.This bill would enact the Work-Force Investment and Economic Development Act of 1999 and would establish, as an advisory body, the Governor’s Council on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development, with prescribed membership, for the purpose of developing a state plan and otherwise complying with the federal act.  The bill would authorize the Governor to appoint one state agency to serve as lead agency in the implementation of the bill.  The bill would require the Governor, for purposes of the federal act and in consultation with the council, to establish criteria for membership on Local Boards on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development.  These local boards would be appointed by the chief elected official of each region, as identified by the Governor.  The bill would require a Youth Council, as required by the federal act, to be created as a subgroup of each Local Board on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development.  The bill would appropriate $20,000 for startup costs of the state council for expenditure during the 1998–99 and 1999–2000 fiscal years.  The bill would specify that funding for support of the council is to be appropriated in the annual budget acts commencing with the budget for the 1999–2000 fiscal year.  Digest Key
      Vote:
      MAJORITY  
      Appropriation:
      NO  
      Fiscal Committee:
      YES  
      Local Program:
      NO  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Article 5 (commencing with Section 12050) is added to Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 3 of Title 2 of the Government Code, to read:
                Article
               5. Work-Force Investment and Economic Development Act of 199912050. This article shall be known and may be cited as the Work-Force Investment and Economic Development Act of 1999.12051. (a) (1) The federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (P.L. 105-220) provides for work-force investment activities, through statewide and local work-force investment systems, that increase the employment, retention, and earnings of participants, and increase occupational skill quality of the work force, reduce welfare dependency, and enhance the productivity and competitiveness of the nation.  That act requires the participation of the state in these programs and the coordination of federal and state work-force investment activities.(2) The federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 represents the first major reform of the nation’s job training system in over 15 years.  The act is the culmination of a four-year bipartisan effort on the part of the President and Congress of the United States to design, with states and local communities, a revitalized system that provides workers with the information, advice, job search assistance, and training they need to get and keep good jobs, and provides employers with skilled workers.(b) Existing state law contains various programs in the following areas that need to be modified to coordinate with, and build upon, the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998, including the following:(1) Work-force investment systems.(2) Adult dislocated worker and youth activities.(3) Adult education.(4) Postsecondary vocational education.(5) Work-force investment-related activities.(6) Welfare-to-work programs.(7) Vocational rehabilitation.(8) Older Americans programs.(9) Trade adjustment assistance.(10) Assistance under the North American Free Trade Agreement.(11) Veterans employment and training programs.(12) Community Services Block Grants.(13) Unemployment assistance.(c) The total annual expenditure in California for the programs specified in subdivision (b) exceeds five billion dollars ($5,000,000,000).(d) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting this article to consolidate, coordinate, and improve employment training, literacy, and vocational rehabilitation programs, and to coordinate these programs with programs required by the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998.(e) The federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 requires the Governor of each state to appoint an advisory board to assist the Governor in the performance of various duties, including the preparation of the state’s initial Workforce Investment Plan, which is required to be submitted to the United States Department of Labor no later than April 1, 2000.12052. The State of California hereby adopts the following year 2005 goals for the state’s Work-Force Investment and Economic Development System:(a) Unemployment in this state shall be reduced to less than 3 percent of the work force, and to less than 3 percent of each of the target populations listed in subdivision (d) of Section 12053.(b) All persons wishing to receive training and placement services shall have access to these services.  Potential employees from all of the target populations listed in subdivision (d) of Section 12053 shall be adequately prepared to enter the work force and be retained in entry-level jobs, and shall receive skills-development assistance and be promoted up the career ladder to realize their full potential as contributors to the state’s social fabric and economy.(c) Employees who are adequately prepared shall be compensated at wage levels that reflect their skills levels and are adequate to support and educate themselves and their families.(d) The work-force investment system shall have the capacity to gather skills-needs information from both small and large employers on a regular basis and to adjust training priorities and outcomes to meet real demand in the marketplace.(e) The work-force investment system shall bring potential employees and employers together with the result that all trainees and employment seekers will be placed in real jobs and will have continued support from the trainers and employers to retain employment and to develop additional skills until the employer takes over skills development and upgrading responsibilities.(f) The work-force investment system shall adequately fund research and development, evaluation, reward, audit, and enforcement activities so that continued progress toward the desired outcomes can be achieved and measured.  The system shall build in effective incentives to train, place, and retain all the target populations listed in subdivision (d) of Section 12053.(g) Effective state and local public-private partnerships shall be in place to oversee ongoing planning, implementation, and accountability efforts undertaken in the work-force investment and economic development system.12053. (a) The Governor’s Council on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development is hereby created, and shall provide advisory assistance to the Governor pursuant to this article.  “Council,” as used in this article, means the Governor’s Council on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development.(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that the council shall fully comply with Section 111 of Title I of the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 2821), which requires a state-level work-force investment board that is advisory to the Governor.(c) The Governor shall be a member of the council and shall appoint the other members of the council, except for the legislative representatives.  The Senate representatives shall be appointed to the council by the Senate Committee on Rules and the Assembly representatives shall be appointed to the council by the Speaker of the Assembly.(d) The composition of the council shall be consistent with the requirements of the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998, and shall include representatives of advocacy groups for the following target populations:(1) Migrant and seasonal farm workers.(2) Native Americans.(3) CalWORKs program participants.(4) Disabled persons.(5) Youth entering the work force.(6) Homeless persons.(7) African-American males.(8) Veterans.(9) Other underemployed populations, including recent immigrants, parolees, and correctional facility inmates.(e) The council shall also include academics and researchers with expertise in economic development and work-force preparation.(f) The initial duties of the council shall be those set forth in Section 111 of Title I of the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 2821).  The Governor shall otherwise establish the duties of the council.(g) Staff employees may be appointed to assist the council in carrying out its responsibilities.  All council staff shall be appointed by the Governor.(h) Commencing with the 1999–2000 fiscal year, funding for the support of the council shall be appropriated in the annual Budget Act.12054. The Governor shall designate one agency to serve as the lead state agency in the implementation of this article.(a) The Governor, in consultation with the council, shall establish criteria for the membership of a Local Board on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development in accordance with Section 117 of Title I of the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 2832) and state priorities.(b) The Legislature finds that none of the existing local boards meet federal requirements.  Therefore, the Legislature directs that the chief elected official in each region, as identified by the Governor, shall appoint for the region a new Local Board on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development no later than July 1, 1999.(c) The youth councils required by Section 117 of Title I of the federal Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 U.S.C. Sec. 2832) shall be created as a subgroup of each Local Board on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development in compliance with federal law.
SEC. 2.The sum of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000) is hereby appropriated from the General Fund to be used for startup costs of the Governor’s Council on Work-Force Investment and Economic Development created by Section 12053 of the Government Code.  Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the funds appropriated by this section are not expended in the 1998–99 fiscal year, those funds shall remain available for expenditure for the expenses of the council in the 1999–2000 fiscal year.