Assembly Bill
              
                        No. 640
                      CHAPTER 612An act to amend Sections 5101.3, 5101.4, and 5101.8 of the Vehicle Code, relating to vehicles.
                  
                  [
                Filed with
              
                Secretary of State
               October 10, 1999.
                      
                Approved  by
              
                Governor
               October 05, 1999.
                      ]
                LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 640, Bates.
                          Special license plates:  fee exemptions.Existing law provides for the issuance of, among others, special license plates entitled “Pearl Harbor Survivor,” “Legion of Valor,” “Combat Wounded,” “Purple Heart,” and “PH.”  Persons entitled to the issuance of these special license plates are generally required to pay an additional registration fee, renewal fee, transfer fee, and replacement fee.This bill would exempt persons entitled to the issuance of those special license plates from the payment of the above described fees. The bill would make conforming changes to the provisions governing the issuance of these special license plates.Digest KeyBill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 5101.3 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read:5101.3. (a) Any person otherwise eligible under this article who qualifies under subdivision (b) may apply for special license plates that shall run in a separate numerical series and shall contain the words “Pearl Harbor Survivor.”  The plates may be issued for any vehicle, except a vehicle used for transportation for hire, compensation, or profit, or a motorcycle, which is owned or coowned by the person.(b) To qualify for issuance of the special plates, the applicant by satisfactory proof shall show all of the following:(1) The applicant was a member of the United States Armed Forces on December 7, 1941, and received an honorable discharge from military service.(2) The applicant was on station at Pearl Harbor, the Island of Oahu, or offshore within a distance of three miles, on December 7, 1941, during the hours of 7:55 a.m. to 9:45 a.m., Hawaii time, as certified by a California chapter of the Pearl Harbor Survivors Association.(c) Upon the death of a person issued special license plates pursuant to this section, his or her surviving spouse may retain the special license plates subject to the conditions set forth in this section.  Upon the death of the spouse, the retained special license plates shall be returned to the department either (1) within 60 days following that death or (2) upon the expiration of the vehicle registration, whichever occurs first.(d) Sections 5106 and 5108 do not apply to this section.SEC. 2. Section 5101.4 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read:5101.4. (a) Any person otherwise eligible under this article who is a recipient of the Army Medal of Honor, Navy Medal of Honor, Air Force Medal of Honor, Army Distinguished Service Cross, Navy Cross, or Air Force Cross may apply for special license plates for the vehicle under this article.  (b) The applicant, by conclusive evidence, shall show that the applicant is a recipient of one of the nation’s highest decorations for valor, as specified in subdivision (a).(c) The special license plates issued under this section shall contain the words “Legion of Valor” and shall run in a regular numerical series.  An adhesive sticker denoting which of the nation’s highest decorations for valor, as specified in subdivision (a), is held by the applicant shall be affixed in a recess provided for it on the license plates.(d) Upon the death of a person issued special license plates pursuant to this section, his or her surviving spouse may retain the special license plates subject to the conditions set forth in this section.  Upon the death of the spouse, the retained special license plates shall be returned to the department either (1) within 60 days following that death or (2) upon the expiration of the vehicle registration, whichever occurs first.(e) Sections 5106 and 5108 do not apply to this section.SEC. 3. Section 5101.8 of the Vehicle Code is amended to read:5101.8. (a) Any person otherwise eligible under this article who is a Purple Heart recipient may apply for special license plates for vehicles that are not used for transportation for hire, compensation, or profit, under this article.  The special plates assigned to the vehicle shall run in a separate numerical series, shall have inscribed on the plate the Purple Heart insignia, and shall contain the words “Combat Wounded” and “Purple Heart” or at least the letters “PH” as part of the numerical series.  The department shall reserve and issue the special plates to all applicants providing the proof required by subdivision (b).(b) The applicant, by satisfactory proof, shall show that the applicant is a Purple Heart recipient.(c) Special plates may be issued pursuant to subdivision (a) only for a vehicle owned or coowned by a Purple Heart recipient and may not be transferred to any other person, including the coowner of the vehicle.  The special plates shall be surrendered to the department upon the death of the Purple Heart recipient.(d) When an applicant for the Purple Heart license plate qualifies as a disabled veteran, as specified in subdivision (b) of Section 22511.55, the applicant may also apply for a distinguishing placard described in subdivision (a) of Section 22511.55 to be used in conjunction with the Purple Heart license plate for the purpose of allowing special parking privileges pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 22511.5.(e) Sections 5106 and 5108 do not apply to this section.