Assembly Bill
              
                        No. 669
                      CHAPTER 368An act to amend Section 3018 of the Elections Code, relating to elections.
                  
                  [
                Filed with
              
                Secretary of State
               September 13, 1999.
                      
                Approved  by
              
                Governor
               September 13, 1999.
                      ]
                LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 669, Vincent.
                          Election procedures.Existing law provides that a voter using an absentee ballot may, prior to the close of the polls on election day, vote the ballot at the offices of the elections official and requires the voter to vote the ballot in the presence of any officer of the elections official or in a voting booth, as specified.This bill would authorize elections officials to provide electronic voting devices for this purpose provided that sufficient devices are provided to include all ballot types in the election.Digest KeyBill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 3018 of the Elections Code is amended to read:3018. (a) Any voter using an absentee ballot may, prior to the close of the polls on election day, vote the ballot at the office of the elections official.  The voter shall vote the ballot in the presence of an officer of the elections official or in a voting booth, at the discretion of the elections official, but in no case may his or her vote be observed.  Where voting machines are used the elections official may provide one voting machine for each ballot type used within the jurisdiction.  Elections officials may provide electronic voting devices for this purpose provided that sufficient devices are provided to include all ballot types in the election.(b) For purposes of this section, the office of an elections official may include satellite locations.  Notice of the satellite locations shall be made by the elections official by the issuance of a general news release, issued not later than 14 days prior to voting at the satellite location.  The news release shall set forth the following information:(1) The satellite location or locations.(2) The dates and hours the satellite location or locations will be open.(3) A telephone number that voters may use to obtain information regarding absentee ballots and the satellite locations.(c) Absentee ballots voted at a satellite location pursuant to this section shall be placed in an absentee voter identification envelope to be completed by the voter pursuant to Section 3011.  However, if the elections official utilizes electronic voting devices, the absentee ballot may be cast on an electronic voting device.