CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 710Introduced  by 
                Assembly Member
              CalderonFebruary 24, 1999An act to add Section 116368 to the Health and Safety Code, relating to drinking water, and making an appropriation therefor.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 710, as introduced, Calderon.
                          Drinking water:  perchlorate removal.Existing law, the Calderon-Sher Safe Drinking Water Act of 1996, requires the State Department of Health Services to submit to the Legislature a Safe Drinking Water Plan for California once every 5 years, and to take all reasonable measures necessary to reduce the risk to the public health from waterborne illnesses in drinking water caused by cryptosporidium and giardia.  Existing law requires the department to adopt primary drinking water standards for contaminants in drinking water that are to be set at levels as close as possible to the corresponding public health goal.  Existing law requires the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment to perform a risk assessment and, based upon that risk assessment, to adopt a public health goal for contaminants in drinking water based exclusively on public health considerations.This bill would require the department to establish a demonstration project regarding the removal of perchlorate from drinking water, and would appropriate $500,000 for that purpose from the General Fund to the department.Digest Key
      Vote:
      2/3  
      Appropriation:
      YES  
      Fiscal Committee:
      YES  
      Local Program:
      NO  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:(a) Perchlorate has been found in drinking water supplies in northern and southern California.(b) Perchlorate is used in solid rocket propellants and has been found in areas where aerospace material development and testing has occurred.(c) No federal or state drinking water standard for perchlorate exists, although the State Department of Health Services has established a provisional action level of 18 parts per billion.(d) Perchlorate was first discovered in several wells in eastern Sacramento County, and subsequent testing in the San Gabriel Valley revealed six wells that contain perchlorate in excess of the state’s provisional action level.(e) Perchlorate is a highly soluble chemical that travels freely in groundwater and surface water and no simple treatment method has been developed to remove it from drinking water supplies.(f) A demonstration project to explore treatment technologies would provide better data on cost-effective methods for perchlorate removal.SEC. 2. Section 116368 is added to the Health and Safety Code, to read:116368. The department shall establish a demonstration project regarding the removal of perchlorate from drinking water through the issuance of requests for proposals.  The department shall review applications received in response to the requests for proposals and select for funding one or more projects to develop a cost-effective method for the removal of perchlorate from drinking water.  The department shall give preference in selecting projects to be funded to those projects that obtain additional funding from other sources, or to those projects that also address other drinking water quality issues, such as volatile organic contaminants or nitrates.SEC. 3. There is hereby appropriated from the General Fund to the State Department of Health Services the sum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000) for the administration and funding of the demonstration project regarding removal of perchlorate from drinking water established pursuant to Section 116368 of the Health and Safety Code.