CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 639Introduced  by 
                Assembly Member
              ThompsonFebruary 23, 1999An act to amend Section 56833.3 of the Government Code, relating to local agency formation commissions.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 639, as introduced, Thompson.
                          Incorporation proposals:  fiscal analysis.Under existing law, the Cortese-Knox Local Government Reorganization Act of 1985, the executive officer of a local agency formation commission, at the request of an interested party, may request the Controller to review the comprehensive fiscal analysis that is required to be prepared for any proposal that includes an incorporation, including the accuracy and reliability of the information, methodologies, and documentation used in the analysis, and to make a report to the commission.  The commission may recover the costs of making the report by charging the person who requested the Controller’s review.This bill, in addition, would require the Controller to review any proposed mitigation payment and the conclusions used in the analysis.  The bill would allow the commission to recover from the interested party the costs of the Controller’s review and report only if the Controller indicates that the information, methodologies, documentation, and conclusions used in the analysis are accurate and reliable.Digest Key
      Vote:
      MAJORITY  
      Appropriation:
      NO  
      Fiscal Committee:
      YES  
      Local Program:
      NO  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 56833.3 of the Government Code is amended to read:56833.3. (a) For any proposal which includes an incorporation, the executive officer shall, at the request of an interested party, which is submitted pursuant to paragraph (b), and prior to issuing his or her report and recommendation pursuant to Section 56833, request the Controller to review the comprehensive fiscal analysis prepared pursuant to Section 56833.1, including any proposed mitigation payment required pursuant to Section 56845.  The request by an interested party shall specify in writing the element or elements of the comprehensive fiscal analysis which the Controller is requested to review and the reasons the Controller is requested to review them.(b) The commission may adopt written procedures for the acceptance, referral, and payment for a request for the Controller’s review, which shall include setting a time period during which an interested party is permitted to submit a request pursuant to subdivision (a).  The time period for accepting a request shall not be less than 30 days following notice given in the same manner as specified in Section 56153.(c) Within 45 days of receiving the analysis, the Controller shall issue a report to the executive officer regarding the accuracy and reliability of the information, methodologies, and documentation, or conclusions used in the analysis, including any proposed mitigation payment required pursuant to Section 56845.  The times within which the executive officer or commission is required to act pursuant to this chapter shall be tolled for the time required by the Controller for completion of the report.  The executive officer shall include the results of the Controller’s report into his or her own report and recommendation issued pursuant to Section 56833.(d) Notwithstanding Sections 56378 and 56386, the Controller may charge the commission for the actual costs incurred pursuant to this section.  The If the Controller’s report indicates that the information, methodologies, documentation, and conclusions used in the analysis are accurate and reliable, the commission may recover these costs by charging the person who requested the Controller’s review.  The commission may not recover costs from the interested party if the Controller’s report questions the accuracy or reliability of the information, methodologies, documentation, or conclusions used in the analysis.