Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               April 28, 1999
                Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               May 25, 1999
                Amended
               IN 
                Senate
               July 06, 1999
                    CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 661Introduced  by 
                Assembly Member
              Vincent
                (Coauthor(s):
              
                Assembly Member
              Campbell, Zettel)February 23, 1999An act to add Section 49079.1 to the Education Code, relating to pupils.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 661, as amended, Vincent.
                          Pupils:  reporting.Under existing law, a school district is required to inform the teacher of each pupil who has engaged in, or is reasonably suspected to have engaged in, certain acts for which the pupil may be suspended or expelled and is required to provide this information to the teacher based upon any records that the district maintains in its ordinary course of business, or receives from a law enforcement agency, regarding the pupil.This bill would require each school district to adopt and implement a policy that establishes a procedure whereby the school district would inform the teacher within 3 business days of the time the district received the information, in writing, of each is in regular contact with law enforcement agencies located within the jurisdiction of the school district and is notified when a pupil who has been charged with, or who has been convicted of, a violent felony that was committed off campus.  The bill would prohibit this information from being placed in the pupil’s file.  The bill would provide that the policy applies only to a charge or conviction that occurred on or after January 1, 2000.  By imposing these new duties on school districts regarding the adoption and implementation of the policy, the bill would impose a state-mandated local program.
   The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement, including the creation of a State Mandates Claims Fund to pay the costs of mandates that do not exceed $1,000,000 statewide and other procedures for claims whose statewide costs exceed $1,000,000.This bill would provide that, if the Commission on State Mandates determines that the bill contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement for those costs shall be made pursuant to these statutory provisions.Digest Key
      Vote:
      MAJORITY  
      Appropriation:
      NO  
      Fiscal Committee:
      YES  
      Local Program:
      YES  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 49079.1 is added to the Education Code, to read:49079.1. (a) Each school district shall adopt and implement a policy that establishes a procedure whereby the school district informs the teacher within three business days of the time the district received the information, in writing, of each pupil who has been charged with, or has been convicted of, a violent felony as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 of the Penal Code that was committed off campus.  The policy shall include, but not be limited to, information based on any record that the district maintains in its ordinary course of business or receives from a law enforcement officer or law enforcement agency. is in regular contact with law enforcement agencies located within the jurisdiction of the school district and is notified when a pupil is charged with, or is convicted of, a violent felony, as defined in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 of the Penal Code, committed off campus.  The policy shall include a procedure by which a teacher is informed, in writing, within 5 business days of the time that a school district receives the notification.(b) The information policy shall provide that the notification required to be transmitted by this section may not be placed in a pupil’s file.(c) The policy shall apply only to a charge or conviction that occurred on or after January 1, 2000.SEC. 2. Notwithstanding Section 17610 of the Government Code, if the Commission on State Mandates determines that this act contains costs mandated by the state, reimbursement to local agencies and school districts for those costs shall be made pursuant to Part 7 (commencing with Section 17500) of Division 4 of Title 2 of the Government Code.  If the statewide cost of the claim for reimbursement does not exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000), reimbursement shall be made from the State Mandates Claims Fund.