Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               May 18, 1999
                    CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 677Introduced  by 
                Senator
              Alpert, 
                Assembly Member
              Rod PachecoFebruary 23, 1999An act to add Section 189.2 to the Penal Code, relating to methamphetamines.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 677, as amended, Alpert.
                          Methamphetamines:  manufacture.Existing law defines murder as the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought, and as either first degree or 2nd degree, depending on the circumstances.  Existing law provides that the possession of specified chemicals with the intent to manufacture methamphetamine is a felony.  The Fourth Appellate District Court of Appeals in People v. James (1998) 62 Cal.App.4th 244, 257-270, held that the manufacture of methamphetamine is an inherently dangerous felony.  The California Supreme Court in People v. Ford (1964) 60 Cal.2d 772, 795, held that, where a death occurs in the commission of an inherently dangerous felony, the mental state present in the commission of that felony may be substituted for the malice element so that the death may be prosecuted as a 2nd degree murder.This bill would provide that the manufacture of methamphetamine constitutes an inherently dangerous felony, as defined, and that any death that occurs in the commission of that felony may be prosecuted as 2nd degree murder.  This bill would state that these provisions are declaratory of existing law.Digest Key
      Vote:
      MAJORITY  
      Appropriation:
      NO  
      Fiscal Committee:
      NO  
      Local Program:
      NO  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 189.2 is added to the Penal Code, to read:189.2. (a) The manufacture of methamphetamine constitutes an inherently dangerous felony and any death which occurs in the commission of that felony may be prosecuted as second degree murder.(b) When a death occurs in the commission of the manufacture of methamphetamine, the mental state present in the commission of the manufacture of methamphetamine may be deemed equivalent to the malice element of murder so that the death may be prosecuted as second degree murder.(c) For the purposes of this section, “inherently dangerous felony” is one which, by its very nature, cannot be committed without creating a substantial risk that someone will be killed, or is an offense carrying a high probability that death will result.SEC. 2. (a) It is the intent of the Legislature in enacting Section 2 of this bill 1 of this act to codify the decision reached in People v. James (1998) 62 Cal.App.4th 244, 257-270, in which the Fourth Appellate District Court of Appeals held that the manufacture of methamphetamines is an inherently dangerous felony for purposes of the second degree felony-murder rule.(b) Section 189.2 of the Penal Code, as added by Section 1 of this act, shall not be construed as limiting the ability of the courts to determine that an offense is an inherently dangerous felony for the purposes of the second degree felony-murder rule.(c) It is not the intent of the Legislature that Section 189.2 of the Penal Code, as added by Section 1 of this act, limit, exclude, or restrict the use of any other judicially recognized inherently dangerous felony in a second degree murder prosecution for a death which occurs in the commission of that offense.