Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               April 05, 1999
                Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               May 28, 1999
                Amended
               IN 
                Assembly
               June 02, 1999
                Corrected
               June 07, 1999
                    CALIFORNIA LEGISLATURE—
                    1999–2000 REGULAR SESSION
                Assembly Bill
              No. 641Introduced  by 
                Assembly Member
              Lempert, Shelley
                (Coauthor(s):
              
                Senator
              Chesbro)February 23, 1999An act to add Chapter 5.2 (commencing with Section 112300) to Part 6 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code, and to amend Sections 13392.5, 13394, and 13394.6 of, to add Sections 13394.1, 13394.2, 13394.3, 13395.2, 13395.4, and 13396.5 to, and to repeal and add Section 13395 of, the Water Code, relating to water.LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 641, as amended, Lempert.
                          Water quality:  enclosed bays and estuaries.(1) The Porter-Cologne Water Quality Act governs the regulation of water quality in this state.  Under the act, the State Water Resources Control Board and the California regional water quality control boards are the principal state agencies with primary responsibility for the control of water quality.  The act requires, among other things, each regional board, on or before January 1, 1998, to complete and submit to the state board a toxic hot spots cleanup plan, as specified.  The act requires the state board, on or before June 30, 1999, to submit to the Legislature a consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan, as prescribed.  The act requires each regional board, as prescribed, on or before January 30, 1994, to develop, for each enclosed bay or estuary, a consolidated data base, as specified, and to develop an ongoing monitoring and surveillance program.  The act requires each regional board, within 120 days from the ranking of a toxic hot spot, to initiate a reevaluation of waste discharge requirements for dischargers that have discharged pollutants that have caused that toxic hot spot.  The act requires the state board to establish an advisory committee that represents prescribed interests to assist in the implementation of these provisions.This bill would require the regional boards, for each enclosed bay or estuary, to develop a consolidated data base that describes all known and potential toxic hot spots for sampling analyses purposes and would revise the monitoring and surveillance program.  The bill would require each regional board to make available to the public its toxic hot spots cleanup plan and would require the state board to include in its consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan all known toxic hot spots.  This bill would require each regional board, on or before January 1, 2001, to complete and submit to the state board, and make available to the public, a modified toxic hot spots cleanup plan, and would require the state board, on or before June 30, 2001, to submit to the Legislature a modified consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan.  The bill would require the state board to implement the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan and the modified consolidated cleanup plan with all deliberate speed.  The bill would require each regional board, not later than 120 days from the date of the adoption of the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan, to initiate a reevaluation of waste discharge requirements for each discharger that is determined by the regional board to be a significant contributor to a toxic hot spot.  The bill would revise requirements relating to the composition of the advisory committee to assist in the implementation of these provisions, which the bill would redesignate as the public advisory committee, and would require the state board to reimburse the members of the committee for travel expenses.The bill would require the regional boards, in cooperation with the state board, to request the Department of Fish and Game to conduct remedial investigations of toxic hot spots and require the state board to seek to recover specified costs incurred in connection with those investigations.  The bill would require the regional boards, on or before January 1, 2004, to develop mass loading reduction plans for each water body, as specified.  The bill would provide that the issuance of waste discharge requirements shall be contingent on a determination by the regional board that the discharger is not contributing an identified pollutant to an existing toxic hot spot or is not contributing to the formation of a potential new hot spot.  The bill would require the state board to establish fees, with a $7,000,000 limitation as to the total amount of fees that may be collected, applicable to all point and nonpoint dischargers who discharge into enclosed bays, estuaries, or adjacent waters, as specified, and would specify a priority listing for the expenditure of revenues generated from the collection of these fees.  Because the bill would provide that a person failing to pay this fee is guilty of a misdemeanor, the bill would impose a state-mandated local program by creating a new crime.The bill would require each regional board, on or before July 1, 2001, that has regulatory authority for one or more enclosed bays or estuaries to conduct comprehensive fish and shellfish tissue studies in each region, as prescribed.  The bill would require the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, on or before July 1, 2000, to issue a fish consumption advisory in accordance with specified procedures and would require the State Department of Health Services, not later than 180 days from the date of issuance of a fish consumption advisory, to make available to public offices those advisories and related advisory pamphlets provided by the department, and to encourage county health departments and other entities to post multilingual fish consumption advisories.
   (2) The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state.  Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.Digest Key
      Vote:
      MAJORITY  
      Appropriation:
      NO  
      Fiscal Committee:
      YES  
      Local Program:
      YES  Bill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:(a) Pollution of bays and estuaries is a threat to the health of ecosystems.(b) Significant bay and estuary contamination results from point and nonpoint sources.(c) Fish in bays and estuaries have been found to be contaminated with high levels of toxic chemicals.(d) People regularly fish and consume contaminated fish from bays and estuaries, endangering their health.(e) The number of water bodies posted with fish consumption advisories continues to increase each year.SEC. 2. Chapter 5.2 (commencing with Section 112300) is added to Part 6 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code, to read:
                CHAPTER
               5.2. Fish Consumption Advisories112300. On or before July 1, 2000, the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment shall issue fish consumption advisories for specific water bodies if data indicate, in the judgement of that office, a public health risk.  Each advisory shall contain information regarding the contamination hazards posed by fish and shellfish that are subject to that advisory and that are caught by recreational and subsistence fishers.  The fish consumption advisory shall be both of the following:(a) Posted in conspicuous places at public piers, docks, and other public fishing locations.(b) Printed in the languages that are primarily read or spoken by those who are recreational and subsistence fishers in the particular region where the advisories are posted.112301. Not later than 180 days from the date of the issuance of a fish consumption advisory by the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, the department State Department of Health Services shall do both of the following:(a) Make available to local, state, and other public offices those advisories and related health advisory pamphlets provided by the department.(b) Encourage county health departments and other entities that have jurisdiction over public fishing locations to post multilingual fish consumption advisories in appropriate locations.SEC. 3. Section 13392.5 of the Water Code is amended to read:13392.5. (a) Each regional board that has regulatory authority for one or more enclosed bays or estuaries shall develop for each enclosed bay or estuary, a consolidated data base that identifies and describes all known and potential toxic hot spots for sampling analyses purposes.  Each regional board shall, in consultation with the state board, also develop an ongoing monitoring and surveillance program that includes, but is not limited to, the following components:(1)  Continuation of the monitoring and surveillance task force that includes representation from agencies, including, but not limited to, the State Department of Health Services and the Department of Fish and Game, that routinely monitor water quality, sediment, and aquatic life, and the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment.(2)  Guidelines to promote standardized analytical methodologies and consistency in data reporting.(3) Identification of additional monitoring and analyses, to be undertaken subsequent to the submittal of the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan to the Legislature on or before June 30, 1999, that are needed to develop a comprehensive toxic hot spot assessment for each enclosed bay and estuary.(b) Each regional board shall make available to state and local agencies and the public all information contained in the consolidated data base, as well as the results of new monitoring and surveillance data.SEC. 4. Section 13394 of the Water Code is amended to read:13394. On or before January 1, 1998, each regional board shall complete and submit to the state board, and make available to the public, a toxic hot spots cleanup plan.  On or before June 30, 1999, the state board shall submit to the Legislature a consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan.  The state board shall include in its consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan all known toxic hot spots.  The cleanup plan submitted by each regional board and the state board shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:(a) A priority ranking of all hot spots, including the state board’s recommendations for remedial action at each toxic hot spot site.(b) A description of each hot spot site including a characterization of the pollutants present at the site.(c) An estimate of the total costs to implement the plan.(d) An assessment of the most likely source or sources of pollutants.(e) An estimate of the costs that may be recoverable from parties responsible for the discharge of pollutants that have accumulated in sediment.(f) A preliminary assessment of the actions required to remedy or restore a toxic hot spot.(g) A two-year expenditure schedule identifying state funds needed to implement the plan.(h) A summary of actions that have been initiated by the regional board to reduce the accumulation of pollutants at existing hot spot sites and to prevent the creation of new hot spots.(i) The plan submitted by the state board shall include findings and recommendations concerning the need for establishment of a toxic hot spots cleanup program.SEC. 5. Section 13394.1 is added to the Water Code, to read:13394.1. On or before January 1, 2001, each regional board shall complete and submit to the state board, and make available to the public, a modified toxic hot spots cleanup plan.  On or before June 30, 2001, the state board shall submit to the Legislature a modified consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan.  The modified cleanup plan submitted by each regional board and the modified consolidated plan submitted by the state board shall include, but not be limited to, a site characterization and a schedule of proposed remediation activities to restore each toxic hot spot for which the regional board has not previously submitted a plan to remedy or restore each toxic hot spot, and a schedule for completion of remediation.  The site characterization shall include the information required under Section 13394.SEC. 6. Section 13394.2 is added to the Water Code, to read:13394.2. (a) The state board and the regional boards, upon the appropriation of funds in the annual Budget Act for those purposes, shall implement the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan and the modified consolidated cleanup plan with all deliberate speed to ensure the remediation of toxic hot spots that pose a potential threat to public health, aquatic life, or the beneficial uses of bay and estuary waters.  The implementation of the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan and the modified consolidated cleanup plan means that action will be taken to remedy or restore each toxic hot spot.  The state board and regional boards shall require parties responsible for pollutants that have accumulated to form a particular toxic hot spot to complete and pay for all actions required of the responsible parties in the cleanup plan for that toxic hot spot.  The state board and the regional boards shall bill responsible parties for any additional implementation costs they incur during each fiscal year.(b) The issuance of waste discharge requirements under this division shall be contingent on a determination by the regional board that the discharger is completing and paying for scheduled remediation of toxic hot spots for which the discharger is wholly or in part responsible, as indicated in the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan or the modified consolidated cleanup plan.  That determination is subject to public review and comment as part of the administrative procedure for permit renewals.(c) For toxic hot spots for which responsible parties cannot be identified, it is the intent of the Legislature that remediation be funded through all of the following means:(1) The use of administrative civil penalties.(2) Nonpoint source grants under Section 319 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sec. 1329).(3) The state revolving fund loan program.(4) The agricultural drainage management loan program.(5) The State Water Pollution Cleanup and Abatement Account in the State Water Quality Control Fund, to the extent that funds for that purpose are appropriated in the annual Budget Act.(6) The Bay Protection and Toxic Cleanup Fund.(7) Other appropriate mechanisms.SEC. 7. Section 13394.3 is added to the Water Code, to read:13394.3. (a) For the purposes of this chapter, consistent with Section 13267, the regional boards, in cooperation with the state board, may do both of the following:(1) Request assistance from the Department of Fish and Game in conducting remedial investigations of toxic hot spots as part of cleanup plans.(2) Require reimbursement from parties responsible for the discharge of pollutants that have accumulated to form the toxic hot spot for any costs incurred by the state board, the regional board, or the Department of Fish and Game pursuant to paragraph (1).SEC. 8. Section 13394.6 of the Water Code is amended to read:13394.6. (a) The state board shall establish a public advisory committee to assist in the implementation of this chapter.  The members of the  public advisory committee shall be appointed by the state board to represent all of the following interests:(1) Trade associations whose members are businesses that use the bay, estuaries, and coastal waters of the state as a resource in their business activities.(2) Dischargers required to pay fees pursuant to Section 13396.5.(3) Environmental, public interest, public health, and wildlife conservation organizations.(b) (1) Not more than two representatives shall be appointed for each of the interest groups described in subdivision (a).(2) Not more than one discharger may be appointed to represent trade associations in accordance with paragraph (1) of subdivision (a).(c) The members of the public advisory committee shall select a member as the chairperson of the committee.  The chairperson shall convene meetings of the committee every three months in any calendar year.  The members of the public advisory committee shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed by the state board for travel expenses.(d) The public advisory committee shall have timely access to all information and documents, except for internal communications, that are prepared to implement this chapter and may provide the state board with its views on how that information should be interpreted and used.SEC. 9. Section 13395 of the Water Code is repealed.SEC. 10. Section 13395 is added to the Water Code, to read:13395. (a) (1) Each regional board, not later than 120 days from the date of the adoption of the consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan, shall initiate a reevaluation of waste discharge requirements for each discharger that is determined by the regional board to be a significant contributor to a toxic hot spot.(2) These reevaluations shall be for the purpose of ensuring compliance with water quality control plans and any amendments to these plans.(3) These reevaluations shall be initiated according to the priority ranking established pursuant to subdivision (a) of Section 13394 and shall be scheduled so that, for each region, the first reevaluation shall be initiated 120 days from, and the last reevaluation shall commence not later than two years from, the date of the adoption of the state board’s consolidated statewide toxic hot spots cleanup plan.(b) (1) The regional board, consistent with the policies and principles set forth in subdivision (a) of Section 13391, and subject to Section 13263, shall reevaluate or revise waste discharge requirements to ensure compliance with water quality control plans and amendments to those plans adopted pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 13260) of Chapter 4, including requirements to prevent the creation of new toxic hot spots and the maintenance or further pollution of existing toxic hot spots.(2) The regional board may determine that it is not necessary to revise a waste discharge requirement if it concludes that the toxic hot spot resulted from practices no longer being conducted by the discharger or permitted under the existing waste discharge requirements, or that the discharger’s contribution to the creation or maintenance of the toxic hot spot is not significant.(c) For the purposes of this section, the reevaluation of waste discharge requirements does not necessarily mean the reopening or revision of those requirements.
SEC. 11.Section 13395.2 is added to the Water Code, to read:13395.2.(a)(1)On or before January 1, 2004, the regional boards shall develop mass loading reduction plans to reduce mass loading for all chemicals of concern identified for each water body, as defined in subdivisions (a) and (b) of Section 13391.5, and to prevent the formation or maintenance of toxic hot spots, including the prevention of discharges of contaminated groundwater.(2)For the purposes of this section, “chemicals of concern” means the chemicals identified for each region that contribute to the toxic hot spot.(b)The issuance of waste discharge requirements under this division shall be contingent on a determination by the regional board that the discharger is not contributing an identified pollutant to an existing toxic hot spot or is not contributing to the formation of a potential new hot spot.(c)The regional boards shall require dischargers to conduct pollution prevention audits and institute a pollution prevention hierarchy.
SEC. 12.Section 13395.4 is added to the Water Code, to read:13395.4. (a) On or before July 1, 2001, each regional board that has regulatory authority for one or more enclosed bays or estuaries shall conduct comprehensive fish and shellfish tissue studies in each region, in consultation with the Department of Fish and Game, which, at a minimum, do both of the following:(1) Identify the concentration of each toxic pollutant of potential concern for human health in each species consumed by the public, based on the marine recreational fisheries study conducted by the National Marine Fisheries Service, as prioritized by the regional boards.(2) Address spatial and seasonal variation.(b) (1) The regional boards shall coordinate fish and shellfish studies conducted pursuant to subdivision (a) as closely as possible with any other fish and shellfish studies conducted by existing programs to prevent the duplication of data collection and other activities.(2) The San Francisco Bay Regional Board shall coordinate its fish and shellfish studies with the San Francisco Estuary Regional Monitoring Program.(3) Each regional board shall share the results of those fish and shellfish tissue studies with the state board, other regional boards, and other appropriate state agencies, to maximize the usefulness, and minimize the cost, of monitoring and field research.
SEC. 13.Section 13396.5 is added to the Water Code, to read:13396.5. (a) (1) The state board shall establish fees applicable to all point and nonpoint dischargers who discharge into enclosed bays, estuaries, or any adjacent waters in the contiguous zone or the ocean as defined in Section 502 of the federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C.A. Sec. 1362), to be collected annually.  The state board shall prepare a fee structure based on mass of toxic pollutants released by each discharger.(2) Revenues generated from the fees described in paragraph (1) shall be expended in accordance with the following list of priorities:(A) Costs incurred by the state and regional boards with regard to the cleanup of toxic hot spots by the responsible parties.(B) Completion of modified consolidated statewide toxic hot spot plans and site characterization pursuant to Section 13394.1.(C) Monitoring required pursuant to this chapter.(D) Undertakings of other requirements imposed pursuant to this chapter.(b) The fees shall create incentives to reduce discharges to the ocean, bays, and estuaries and shall be based on the relative threat to water quality from point and nonpoint dischargers.  The schedule of fees shall be set at an amount sufficient to pay the costs incurred by the state board, the regional boards, the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, the Department of Fish and Game, and the State Department of Health Services in carrying out this chapter.  The total amount of fees collected under this section shall not exceed seven million dollars ($7,000,000).  Nothing in this section limits or restricts the funding of activities required by this chapter from sources in addition to the fees established by this section.(c) Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the Bay Protection and Toxic Cleanup Fund, which is hereby created.  The money in the fund, upon appropriation by the Legislature, shall be used by the state board for the purposes of carrying out this chapter.(d) Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be in addition to fees established pursuant to Section 13260 and are not subject to the maximum fee restriction imposed in subdivision (d) of Section 13260.(e) Any person failing to pay a fee established under this section when so requested by the state board is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to civil liability in accordance with subdivision (d) of Section 13261.(e)Fees imposed pursuant to this section shall include fees on agricultural nonpoint source dischargers on a per acre basis.(f) The state board and the regional boards shall bill dischargers for costs incurred during each fiscal year.
SEC. 14.SEC. 13. No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because the only costs that may be incurred by a local agency or school district will be incurred because this act creates a new crime or infraction, eliminates a crime or infraction, or changes the penalty for a crime or infraction, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code, or changes the definition of a crime within the meaning of Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution.___________________Title — Line 4.___________________