Assembly Bill
              
                        No. 655
                      CHAPTER 954An act relating to public postsecondary education, and declaring the urgency thereof, to take effect immediately.
                  
                  [
                Filed with
              
                Secretary of State
               October 10, 1999.
                      
                Approved  by
              
                Governor
               October 10, 1999.
                      ]
                LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 655, Scott.
                          Public postsecondary education:  nursing report.Existing law establishes the system of public postsecondary education in the state.  Among the segments of this system are the California Community Colleges, the California State University, and the University of California.This bill would require the Chancellor of the California Community Colleges, the Chancellor of the California State University, the President of the University of California, and the President of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities to jointly issue a report to the Governor and the Legislature with respect to a recommended plan, that may include alternative strategies, and budget for significantly increasing the number of students graduating from nursing programs in the state and for providing specialty training to licensed nurses in prescribed areas of specialization.  The bill would require the report to be submitted on or before January 1, 2001.  The bill would apply to the University of California only to the extent that the Regents of the University of California, by resolution, make it applicable.The bill would declare that it would take effect immediately as an urgency statute.Digest KeyBill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. (a) The Legislature finds and declares all of the following:(1) Nationally, California ranks last among the 50 states in the proportion of registered nurses per 100,000 population.(2) California is experiencing a nursing shortage that could have serious consequences for the delivery of health care in the state.(3) The average age of registered nurses in California is 46 years. Retirements are increasing each year, while the number of new nurse graduates is stable.(4) As the baby boom population ages, the need for a larger nursing work force will increase dramatically.(5) Waiting times for students who are interested in enrolling in nursing programs are unacceptably long and are not consistent with the needs of the state.(6) The state has used alternative strategies in other professions experiencing shortages, including the teaching profession, and has used methods such as increasing full-time equivalent student funding, grants, and loan forgiveness programs.(b) It is the intent of the Legislature that both of the following occur:(1) (A) The Chancellor of the California Community Colleges, the Chancellor of the California State University, the President of the University of California, and the President of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities shall jointly develop a plan and budget for both of the following:(i) Significantly increasing the number of students graduating from  nursing programs in the State of California.(ii) Providing specialty training to licensed nurses, including training in the nursing specialty areas of critical care, emergency, obstetrics, pediatrics, neonatal intensive care, and operating room nursing.(B) A representative from a hospital-based, board-approved nursing program shall be invited to participate in the development of a plan and budget pursuant to this paragraph.(2) In the development of a plan pursuant to this subdivision, the offices of the Chancellor of the California Community Colleges, the Chancellor of the California State University, the President of the University of California, and the President of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities shall jointly form an advisory committee, composed of representatives of the Board of Registered Nursing, the Licensing Division of the State Department of Health Services, organizations representing licensed nurses, organizations representing hospitals, long-term care facilities, and other employers of registered nurses, the California Strategic Planning Committee on Nursing, professional nursing organizations, hospital-based board-approved nursing programs, and other interested groups.SEC. 2. Notwithstanding Section 7550.5 of the Government Code, on or before April 1, 2000, the Chancellor of the Community Colleges, the Chancellor of the California State University, the President of the University of California, and the President of the Association of Independent Colleges and Universities shall jointly submit a report to the Governor and the Legislature.  The report shall contain a recommended plan, that may include alternative strategies, and budget for both of the following:(a) Significantly increasing the number of students graduated from nursing programs in order to meet the state’s current and future needs of licensed nursing personnel.(b) Providing specialty training programs for licensed nurses, including, but not necessarily limited to, the nursing specialty areas set forth in Section 1, to registered nurses.SEC. 3. This act shall apply to the University of California only to the extent that the Regents of the University of California, by resolution, make it applicable.SEC. 4. This act is an urgency statute necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health, or safety within the meaning of Article IV of the Constitution and shall go into immediate effect.  The facts constituting the necessity are:In order to ensure that there will be a sufficient number of nurses in the immediate future to care for the public of the State of California, it is necessary that this act take effect immediately.