Assembly Bill
              
                        No. 704
                      CHAPTER 334An act to amend Sections 441 and 463 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, relating to taxation.
                  
                  [
                Filed with
              
                Secretary of State
               September 07, 1999.
                      
                Approved  by
              
                Governor
               September 07, 1999.
                      ]
                LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL'S DIGESTAB 704, Honda.
                          Ad valorem taxation:  taxpayer reporting.The California Constitution authorizes the Legislature to provide for taxation of tangible personal property and to exempt or classify personal property for differential taxation.  Statutory law requires each person owning taxable personal property with an aggregate cost of $100,000 or more to file a signed property statement with the county assessor.  The statement must be filed each year between the lien date and 5 p.m. on the last Friday in May, or between the lien date and any earlier time chosen by the assessor.This bill would instead provide that the statement must be filed annually between the lien date and 5 p.m. on April 1.  This bill would provide a penalty for statements not filed by May 7 which deadline would be extended when weekends, holidays, or office closures occur.  Because this change in the filing deadline would require administrative changes by county assessors, it would impose a state-mandated local program.This bill would permit a property statement to be amended and would require certain information to be provided by the assessor, thereby also imposing a state-mandated local program.The bill would make related changes.The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.Digest KeyBill TextThe people of the State of California do enact as follows:SECTION 1. Section 441 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read:441. (a) Each person owning taxable personal property, other than a mobilehome subject to Part 13 (commencing with Section 5800), having an aggregate cost of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000) or more for any assessment year shall file a signed property statement with the assessor. Every person owning personal property that does not require the filing of a property statement or real property shall, upon request of the assessor, file a signed property statement.  Failure of the assessor to request or secure the property statement does not render any assessment invalid.(b) The property statement shall be declared to be true under the penalty of perjury and filed annually with the assessor between the lien date and 5 p.m. on April 1.  The penalty provided by Section 463 applies for property statements not filed by May 7.  If May 7 falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, a property statement that is mailed and postmarked on the next business day shall be deemed to have been filed between the lien date and 5 p.m. on May 7.  If, on the dates specified in this subdivision, the county’s offices are closed for the entire day, that day is considered a legal holiday for purposes of this section.(c) The property statement may be filed with the assessor through the United States mail, properly addressed with postage prepaid.  For purposes of determining the date upon which the property statement is deemed filed with the assessor, the date of postmark as affixed by the United States Postal Service, or the date certified by a bona fide private courier service on the envelope containing the application, shall control.  This subdivision shall be applicable to every taxing agency, including, but not limited to, a chartered city and county, or chartered city.(d) At any time, as required by the assessor for assessment purposes, every person shall make available for examination information or records regarding his or her property or any other personal property located on premises he or she owns or controls.  In this connection details of property acquisition transactions, construction and development costs, rental income, and other data relevant to the determination of an estimate of value are to be considered as information essential to the proper discharge of the assessor’s duties.(e) In the case of a corporate owner of property, the property statement shall be signed either by an officer of the corporation or an employee or agent who has been designated in writing by the board of directors to sign the statements on behalf of the corporation.(f) In the case of property owned by a bank or other financial institution and leased to an entity other than a bank or other financial institution, the property statement shall be submitted by the owner bank or other financial institution.(g) The assessor may refuse to accept any property statement he or she determines to be in error.(h) If a taxpayer fails to provide information to the assessor pursuant to subdivision (d) and introduces any requested materials or information at any assessment appeals board hearing, the assessor may request and shall be granted a continuance for a reasonable period of time.  The continuance shall extend the two-year period specified in subdivision (c) of Section 1604 for a period of time equal to the period of the continuance.(i) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, every person required to file a property statement pursuant to this section shall be permitted to amend that property statement until May 31 of the year in which the property statement is due, for errors and omissions not the result of willful intent to erroneously report.  The penalty authorized by Section 463 shall not apply to an amended statement received prior to May 31, provided the original statement is not subject to penalty pursuant to subdivision (b).  The amended property statement shall otherwise conform to the requirements of a property statement as provided in this article.(j) This subdivision shall apply to the oil, gas, and mineral extraction industry only.  Any information that is necessary to file a true, correct, and complete statement shall be made available by the assessor, upon request, to the taxpayer by mail or at the office of the assessor by February 28.  For each business day beyond February 28 that the information is unavailable, the filing deadline in subdivision (b) shall be extended in that county by one business day, for those statements affected by the delay.  In no case shall the filing deadline be extended beyond June 1 or the first business day thereafter.SEC. 2. Section 463 of the Revenue and Taxation Code is amended to read:463. If any person who is required by law or is requested by the assessor to make an annual property statement fails to file an annual property statement within the time limit specified by Section 441 or make and subscribe the affidavit respecting his or her name and place of residence, a penalty of 10 percent of the assessed value of the unreported taxable tangible property of that person placed on the current roll shall be added to the assessment made on the current roll.Notice of any penalty added to the secured roll pursuant to this section shall be mailed by the assessor to the assessee at his or her address as contained in the official records of the county assessor.If the assessee establishes to the satisfaction of the county board of equalization or the assessment appeals board that the failure to file the property statement within the time required by Section 441 was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect, it may order the penalty abated, provided the assessee has filed with the county board written application for abatement of the penalty within the time prescribed by law for the filing of applications for assessment reductions.If the penalty is abated it shall be canceled or refunded in the same manner as an amount of tax erroneously charged or collected.SEC. 3. No reimbursement is required by this act pursuant to Section 6 of Article XIII B of the California Constitution because this act provides for offsetting savings to local agencies or school districts that result in no net costs to the local agencies or school districts, within the meaning of Section 17556 of the Government Code.